Instructions for using GenusLab VR 0.5
--------------------------------------

* Requirements

You need an Oculus Rift headset and Oculus Touch hand controllers.


* Purpose

This program allows you to draw on a genus two surface and see the preimage of
your drawing in the hyperbolic plane in real time.  It also allows drawing on
the hyperbolic plane while showing the projection to the surface in real time.

The purpose of this illustration is to teach the user about the universal
covering of a surface, about hyperbolic geometry, and to allow the user to make
drawings and figures the are useful in the study of surface topology.


* Startup and general controls

When you start the application, you will be standing in front of a small table.
On the table are a LASER POINTER and a GENUS TWO SURFACE.

In front of you, to the left, is a view of a hyperbolic tiling.  It is
surrounded by buttons that perform various functions.  This is the H2 VIEW
COMPLEX.

In front of you, to the right, is a color chooser panel with a row of buttons
below it.  This is the COLOR CHOOSER COMPLEX.

The essential control conventions of this application are:

  * To grab an object, reach for it and press the Hand Trigger on the Touch
  controller.  This is the button located on the hand grip part of the
  controller that usually rests under the second finger.  The grabbable objects are:
    - The genus two surface
    - The laser pointer

  * To "activate" the laser pointer (while holding it), hold down the Index
  Trigger on the touch controller.  Activating the laser pointer is used to:
    - Draw on the genus two surface,
    - Draw on the hyperbolic plane, or
    - Press buttons

The following additional keyboard controls can be used at any time:

  * Control-Q will quit the application

When the application starts, the drawing color is set to transparency.  Drawing
a transparent spot is equivalent to erasing part of an object.  Thus, picking up
the laser pointer and holding the index trigger will allow you to erase parts of
the surface or of the hyperbolic plane.


* Laser Pointer

To do anything interesting, you will need to pick up the laser pointer from the
table.  Either hand can be used, according to your preference.

If the laser pointer is dropped, it will fall to the floor, disappear, and then
reappear on the table again.  This feature ensures that the laser pointer cannot
be lost.


* Genus Two Surface

The surface does not experience gravity.  The main action that can be performed
using the surface is drawing, by pointing the laser at it and holding the index
trigger.


* H2 View Complex

The large central area shows a tiling of the hyperbolic plane by regular
quadrilaterals.  On the four sides of the tiling view are buttons with arrows,
which (when activated) slide the hyperbolic plane in any of four directions.

At the four corners of the H2 View Complex are buttons with other functions
related to drawing:

  * The upper-left button toggles between the Klein and Poincare models of
  hyperbolic geometry.  The image shown on this button is a preview of what the
  other model looks like. 
  
  * The upper-right button cycles between various background textures that can
  be applied to the tiling and surface.  The image shown on this button is a
  preview of the next texture.
  
  * The lower-left button (with a "go back" icon as its texture) erases all of
  the user-created drawings on the surface.
  
  * The lower-right button (with a "center" icon as its texture) resets the
  position of the hyperbolic plane to its default value.


* Color Chooser Complex

The upper panel shows a range of colors.  To select one as the drawing color,
simply point the laser at the desired color and activate it (Index Trigger).

The buttons below this panel have several functions:

  * The five leftmost buttons allow the user to select shades of gray.

  * The partially transparent button sets the drawing color to "transparency".

  * The button with concentric circles toggles between the two laser modes:

     - Paint mode, where the first place where the laser meets the surface or
     tiling is drawn.  When paint mode is selected, the laser beam becomes PINK
     when active.

     - Drill mode, where every intersection point between the laser and the
     surface or tiling is drawn.  Thus, drill mode can be used to simulate
     slicing the surface in half (and similar effects).  When drill mode is
     selected, the laser beam becomes GREEN when active.


* Known Issues

  * The hyperbolic plane can only slide a short distance before the view becomes
  distorted and unusable.  If this happens, recenter the tiling using the button
  on the lower right of the H2 view complex.

  * The laser beam can still press buttons after passing through the surface. It
  seems that this often causes behavior unexpected by new users, where e.g. the
  tiling slides around or the drawing is cleared while the user attempts to draw
  on the surface.  Since this happens when the surface is held directly in front
  of the tiling, one workaround is to hold the surface off to the side (i.e. not
  in front of the tiling) while drawing, and to look to the tiling only when
  drawing is finished.